[DOCS] RAG overview (#119590)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/search/search-your-data/retrieval-augmented-generation.asciidoc

[rag-elasticsearch]
== Retrieval augmented generation

> .🍿 Prefer a video introduction?

Reviewer: very cute

***********************
Check out https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OS4ZefUPAks[this short video] from the Elastic Snackable Series.
***********************

Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) is a technique where additional context is retrieved from an external datastore before prompting a language model to generate a response using the retrieved context.

> This grounds the model with in-context learning.

Reviewer: This sentence is a little colloquial - could rephrase to clarify what you mean by "grounds"

Author: 👍 [grounding](https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/generative-ai/docs/grounding/overview) is the term of art but agree shouldn't assume knowledge

> Compared to finetuning or continuous pretraining, RAG can be implemented faster and cheaper, and it has several advantages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compared to fine-tuning or continuous pre-training, RAG can be implemented more quickly and cheaply, and offers several advantages.
```

image::images/search/rag-venn-diagram.svg[RAG sits at the intersection of information retrieval and generative AI, align=center, width=500]

RAG sits at the intersection of https://www.elastic.co/what-is/information-retrieval[information retrieval] and generative AI.
{es} is an excellent tool for implementing RAG, because it offers various retrieval capabilities, such as full-text search, vector search, and hybrid search.

[discrete]
[[rag-elasticsearch-advantages]]
=== Advantages of RAG

RAG has several advantages:

> * *Improved context:* Enables grounding the language model with additional, up-to-date, and/or private data.

Reviewer: again `grounding`

* *Reduced hallucination:* Helps minimize factual errors by enabling models to cite authoritative sources.

> * *Cost efficiency:* Requires less maintenance compared to finetuning or continuously pretraining models.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Cost efficiency:* Requires less maintenance compared to fine-tuning or continuously pre-training models.
```

* *Enhanced security:* Controls data access by leveraging {es}'s <<authorization, user authorization>> features, such as role-based access control and field/document-level security.
* *Simplified response parsing:* Eliminates the need for custom parsing logic by letting the language model handle parsing {es} responses and formatting the retrieved context.
* *Flexible implementation:* Works with basic 
// TODO: uncomment when page is live <<full-text-search,full-text search>> 

> full-text search and can be gradually updated to add more advanced and computationally intensive <<semantic-search,semantic search>> capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
full-text search, and can be gradually updated to add more advanced and computationally intensive <<semantic-search,semantic search>> capabilities.
```

[discrete]
[[rag-elasticsearch-components]]
=== RAG system overview

The following diagram illustrates a simple RAG system using {es}.

image::images/search/rag-schema.svg[Components of a simple RAG system using Elasticsearch, align=center, width=800]

> The system consists of the following components:

Reviewer: I think "components" is the wrong word here. possibly bad edit:

```suggestion
The system augments search results using the following process:
```

Author: agree! I'll reformulate

> . User submits a query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The user submits a query.
```

> . Elasticsearch retrieves relevant documents, using full-text search, vector search, or hybrid search

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Elasticsearch retrieves relevant documents using full-text search, vector search, or hybrid search.
```

> . Language model processes the context and generates a response, using custom instructions, such as "Cite a source" or "Provide a concise summary of the `content` field in markdown format"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The language model processes the context and generates a response, using custom instructions. Examples of custom instructions include "Cite a source" or "Provide a concise summary of the `content` field in markdown format."
```

> . Model returns final response to the user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. The model returns the final response to the user.
```

[TIP]
====
A more advanced setup might include query rewriting between steps 1 and 2. This intermediate step could use one or more additional language models with different instructions to reformulate queries for more specific and detailed responses.
====

[discrete]
[[rag-elasticsearch-getting-started]]
=== Getting started

Start building RAG applications quickly with Playground, which seamlessly integrates {es} with language model providers.
The Playground UI enables you to build, test, and deploy RAG interfaces on top of your {es} indices.

Playground automatically selects the best retrieval methods for your data, while providing full control over the final {es} queries and language model instructions.
You can also download the underlying Python code to integrate with your existing applications.

> Learn more in the {kibana-ref}/playground.html[documentation] and 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Learn more in the {kibana-ref}/playground.html[Playground documentation] and 
```
